@c -*-texinfo-*-
@c Loko Scheme Developer's Manual.
@c Copyright © 2019, 2020 G. Weinholt
@c SPDX-License-Identifier: EUPL-1.2+

@node Introduction
@chapter Introduction

@node Scheme
@section Scheme

Scheme is a dialect of the Lisp programming language invented by Guy
Lewis Steele Jr.@: and Gerald Jay Sussman in the mid 1970s. The first
Lisp language was LISP, which was created by John McCarthy in the
second half of the 1950s.

Lisp's syntax uses S-expressions, which were created by McCarthy to
represent LISP functions as data in his @emph{eval} function
(published in 1960). @emph{Eval} is a one-page universal LISP function
capable of running any other LISP function. The first LISP interpreter
was created when Steve Russell compiled the @emph{eval} function by
hand.

Today many languages offer a large subset of the features of Lisp, and
some attempt to offer those of Scheme as well. S-expressions are not
added because it would turn those languages into Lisps.

Distinctive features of Lisp languages are dynamic typing, garbage
collection, and S-expressions (``symbolic expressions''). Scheme adds
some additional distinctive features on top of those: static scoping,
proper tail-recursion, hygienic macros, full continuations and
@emph{dynamic-wind}.

@itemize
@item
Dynamic typing means that the programmer does not need to prove to the
compiler that a program is well-typed. This is beneficial because
there are true statements about programs that are impossible to prove
except by running the programs.

@item
Garbage collection is the automatic reclamation of unused memory. This
is beneficial because there are programs that are impossible to write
without it.

@item
S-expressions provide a convenient means to represent code as data, in
a format that the Lisp programmer is used to working with, which
enables automatic transformations via macros and dynamic evaluation
through @emph{eval}. This is beneficial because there are programs
that are impossible to write without dynamic code evaluation. It also
relieves the programmer of having to guess how the parser will pick
apart the code.

@item
Static scoping means that variable usage is connected with the binding
of the variable as it appears in the text of the program. This is
standard in most languages today, but Scheme is one of the few
languages that gets this consistently right. (Dynamic scoping is
available if needed through @emph{dynamic-wind}, because there are
some programs that cannot be written without it).

@item
Proper tail-recursion provides a guarantee that when a procedure call
appears in a @emph{tail context} (such as in the final expression of a
procedure) no extra stack frame is used. This is beneficial because
there are programs that cannot be written without proper
tail-recursion.

@item
Hygienic macros means that a library can provide extensions to the
Scheme syntax that are indistinguishable from built-in Scheme syntax,
and hygiene means that these macros do not accidentally break static
scoping. Less powerful macro systems are prone to the insertion of
variables that conflict with those already used in the programs.

@item
(Continuations are usually explained in hopelessly abstract terms, so
I will be very concrete here). @emph{Continuations are copies of the
stack} and the state associated with @emph{dynamic-wind}. Many
languages provide a way to escape upwards in the stack (e.g.@: longjmp
or exceptions), but continuations also lets programs restore the stack
to what it looked like when the continuation was captured. Imagine
throwing an exception, thereby going up the stack, and then having the
exception handler fix the problem and then go back down the stack to
resume. Scheme is also unusual in that it lets continuations be
reinstated multiple times. Continuations are useful because there are
programs that cannot be written without them. Any control structure
can be expressed with them, even those not built in to the language.

@item
@emph{Dynamic-wind} provides a means to run code when a part of the
program is entered and then when it is exited. Continuations means
that it can happen multiple times. This feature is useful because
there are programs that cannot be written without it.

@end itemize

The features described above can be simulated in languages that lack
them. Tail-recursion can be implemented manually by simulating a stack
with a list, dynamic typing can be implemented with an abstract data
type and type dispatching, garbage collection can be implemented for a
data structure, and continuations can be implemented manually with
continuation-passing style.

Such simulations are always possible in the sense that any
Turing-complete language can implement any other Turing-complete
language. But these simulations will not exist on the same level as
the host language and are therefore of an inferior nature.

@node Scheme standards
@section Scheme standards

Scheme is standardized through two different types of documents. The
first are called the @emph{Revised@sup{n} Reports on the Algorithmic
Language Scheme (R@sup{n}RS)}. R@sup{5}RS came out in 1998 and was
followed by R@sup{6}RS in 2007. R@sup{5}RS was also followed by
R@sup{7}RS, which came out in 2013. Both of them are successors to
R@sup{5}RS.

The second type of documents are called @emph{Scheme Requests For
Implementation (SRFI)}. This is a community-driven process whereby new
language features can be developed and suggested for implementations
to use. Many of them are mostly portable code, while other ones
require adaptions to each Scheme implementation that wants to support
them.


@node Where Loko fits in
@section Where Loko fits in

Scheme has many implementations. Every known way to implement a
programming language has probably been tried with Scheme. There are
Scheme implementations for basically all operating systems and all
types of machines. There have even been Scheme CPUs. Some say there
are more implementations than applications. And Loko Scheme is one of
those implementations.

Every Scheme implementation has something that makes it unique. This
is what is peculiar about Loko:

@itemize
@item
Loko runs on bare metal (and on top regular Unix kernels).

@item
Loko builds statically linked binaries.

@item
Loko is written in only Scheme and a small amount of assembly.

@item
Loko's ABI is incompatible with C and does not use it on any level.

@item
Loko's runtime uses concurrency based on Concurrent ML.

@item
Loko supports both R@sup{6}RS and R@sup{7}RS libraries and programs.

@item
Loko provides the safety guarantees of R@sup{6}RS even for R@sup{7}RS
code.

@item
Loko uses the hardware for free type checking (branchless @code{car},
etc).
@end itemize

Due to some of the above, Loko Scheme is not suitable for every use
case. There are plenty of other Scheme implementations available if
Loko Scheme cannot work for your application.
