@c -*-texinfo-*-
@c Loko Scheme Developer's Manual.
@c Copyright © 2019, 2020, 2021 G. Weinholt
@c SPDX-License-Identifier: EUPL-1.2+

@node Standard libraries
@section Standard libraries

The standard @url{https://r6rs.org, R6RS Scheme} libraries are
provided. Please see the documents on the website for the official
versions. Unofficial versions of
@url{https://weinholt.se/scheme/r6rs/, R6RS updated with errata} are
also available online.

The standard @url{http://r7rs.org, R7RS-small} libraries are provided
as well. They are not available by default in the REPL and need to be
imported with e.g.@: @code{(import (scheme base))}.

@node SRFI implementations
@subsection SRFI implementations

See the package @url{https://akkuscm.org/packages/chez-srfi/,
chez-srfi} for many SRFIs that work with Loko.

The following SRFIs are provided with Loko.

@itemize
@item
@code{(srfi :19 time)} -- time and date procedures.
@url{https://srfi.schemers.org/srfi-19/srfi-19.html}. The copy that
exists in chez-srfi is only used up to and including Loko Scheme
0.6.0.

@item
@code{(srfi :38 with-shared-structures)} -- implemented using the
usual write procedure.
@url{https://srfi.schemers.org/srfi-38/srfi-38.html}.

@item
@code{(srfi :98 os-environment-variables)} -- read-only access to
environment variables. Documented at
@url{https://srfi.schemers.org/srfi-98/srfi-98.html}.

@item
@code{(srfi :170 posix)} -- access to common POSIX operations,
currently only available on Linux.
Documented at @url{https://srfi.schemers.org/srfi-170/srfi-170.html}.

@item
@code{(srfi :215 logging)} -- central log exchange. This is used in
Loko Scheme as a target for all kinds of logs, including crashes
in fibers and log messages from drivers.
Documented at @url{https://srfi.schemers.org/srfi-215/srfi-215.html}.
@end itemize

The package @url{https://akkuscm.org/packages/loko-srfi/, loko-srfi}
also provides SRFIs. This package is for SRFIs that create too much
entanglement through their dependencies to be suitable for either
chez-srfi or Loko Scheme proper. At the time of writing it provides
SRFI 106 (basic sockets) for Linux.

@c Local Variables:
@c TeX-master: "loko.texi"
@c End:
