@c -*-texinfo-*-
@c Loko Scheme Developer's Manual.
@c Copyright © 2019 G. Weinholt
@c SPDX-License-Identifier: EUPL-1.2+

@node Tools support
@section Tools support

This section describes some tools can be used together with Loko
Scheme when things go wrong.

@menu
* Disassembly::
* Debugging::
* Debug logs::
* Profiling::
* Memory checking::
* Fuzzing::
@end menu

@node Disassembly
@subsection Disassembly

Loko can be disassembled using any regular disassembler that supports
ELF and amd64, such as the one in GNU binutils and GNU gdb. There is
also a built-in disassembler for procedures, @pxref{Base library,
disassemble}.

@node Debugging
@subsection Debugging

Loko can be debugged with @url{https://www.gnu.org/software/gdb/, GNU
gdb} with the help of @file{loko-gdb.py}. Stack traces and pretty
printing should work. Line information is currently missing.

Scheme objects can get very big. Limit the output with e.g. @code{set
print elements 5}.

Traps from the processor are translated into conditions with a
@code{&program-counter} condition, e.g.@: this error from trying to
evaluate @code{(#f)}:

@example
The condition has 5 components:
 1. &assertion &violation &serious
 2. &who: apply
 3. &message: "Tried to call a non-procedural object"
 4. &irritants: (#f)
 5. &program-counter: #x309795
End of condition components.
@end example

You can look up the trapping instruction with a disassembler.

@node Debug logs
@subsection Debug logs

The PC port of Loko can have debug logging redirected from the VGA
console with the @env{CONSOLE} environment variable:

@itemize
@item
@code{CONSOLE=vga} prints to the VGA text mode console.

@item
@code{CONSOLE=com1} prints to COM1 (BIOS's default baud rate).

@item
@code{CONSOLE=debug} prints to QEMU's debug console. This is enabled
with e.g. @code{-debugcon vc}.

@end itemize

@node Profiling
@subsection Profiling

Loko on Linux can be profiled with
@url{https://perf.wiki.kernel.org/index.php/Main_Page, perf}.

Some micro benchmarks can be done from inside Loko,
@pxref{Base library, time-it*}.

@node Memory checking
@subsection Memory checking

It's possible to run Loko in @url{http://valgrind.org/, Valgrind}.
Valgrind does not support alignment checking, so Loko will print a
warning about that. Loko also does not use the ``red zone'', so
Valgrind will think that a lot of what Loko is doing uses
uninitialized memory. Don't believe it.

@node Fuzzing
@subsection Fuzzing

Loko can be used with @url{https://aflplus.plus/, AFL++}. This tool
can explore all possible paths through a program in order to find
crashes. You can use it to automatically check that, e.g., a parser
does not crash on any inputs.

The way to use it is to prepare a small program that reads from the
standard input and passes it to the code under test. Build your
program with @code{loko -fcoverage=afl++ program.sps}. This flag tells
Loko to add branch instrumentation for AFL++. There is some overhead
associated with this code, so only use it during fuzzing.

The instrumented binary will mutate a memory area that is shared with
@code{afl-fuzz}. Every @code{if} expression (including syntax which
expands to an @code{if} expression) will mutate the area differently
depending on whether the true or the false branch was taken. This
should mean that the area gives a unique fingerprint for each path
taken through the program.

When fuzzing a program built with Loko you should normally run the
fuzzer with @code{AFL_CRASH_EXITCODE=70 afl-fuzz -i inputs/ -o
outputs/ -- ./program}, where inputs is a directory with files that
contain sample inputs.

It makes sense to verify that the interaction between AFL++ and the
program is working as intended and that AFL++ detects crashes. This
can be done by introducing an explicit crash in the program for
certain inputs.

A full discussion about AFL++ is out of scope for this manual. Please
see the AFL++ website for more reading material.

The instrumentation support has been tested with AFL++ 4.04c.
